
Reference Library
*****************

A number of reference records can be found in the library directory.
These collect together metadata and data associated with meaningful
parameter sets that can then be used as inputs for the calculations.


crystal_prototype records
=========================

Each crystal_prototype record defines a specific crystal prototype,
which can be thought of as a crystal structure stripped of the
elemental information.  For example, face-centered cubic, fcc, is a
prototype, while fcc gold is a crystal structure.  Crystal structures
can then be generated by pairing the unique lattice sites of a
prototype with elements and scaling the prototype’s cell dimensions to
the crystal structure’s lattice constants.


potential_LAMMPS records
========================

The potential_LAMMPS records contain fields that are used to
dynamically generate the LAMMPS input command lines associated with
defining or importing interatomic potentials.  Specifying a
potential_LAMMPS record for each potential implementation allows the
different potentials to be easily iterated over without concern for
the potential’s style or the elements that it models.


Defect records
==============

Many of iprPy’s calculations are oriented around the creation of
crystalline defects.  The defect generation algorithms should be as
general as possible to be compatible across a wide range of
structures. However, for a given system/structure, only certain defect
configurations are meaningful.  These records define parameter sets
for the defect generation functions, and provide metadata for
identifying and classifying important defect configurations.
